# useEffect: persistent state

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/02.md`

The first extra credit is extremely important because its only a few characters
of code but massive performance change. Before the change in the lazy
initialization everytime the state of name was changed the app re-rendered.

This is because `name` in the useState was reading localStorage for the state so
any change to the state caused a re-render

```javascript
function Greeting({initialName = ''}) {
  const [name, setName] = React.useState(
    window.localStorage.getItem('name') ?? initialName,
  )

  React.useEffect(() => {
    window.localStorage.setItem('name', name)
  })

  function handleChange(event) {
    setName(event.target.value)
  }

  return (
    <div>
      <form>
        <label htmlFor="name">Name: </label>
        <input value={name} onChange={handleChange} id="name" />
      </form>
      {name ? <strong>Hello {name}</strong> : 'Please type your name'}
    </div>
  )
}
```

To fix this we lazily initialize the state by calling a function on initial
render. This is so that we only need to call this function when initialization
of the state is necessary instead of everytime the state changes.

Its important to note that lazy initialization should really only be used when
the computation is expensive. It doesn't make sense to lazily initialize
something that's computationally cheap

```javascript
const [name, setName] = React.useState(
  () => window.localStorage.getItem('name') ?? initialName,
)
```

How `useEffect` works is that it will re-run the callback everytime our
component renders this means it can also render if the parent component renders.
This is bad because now our component is not separate/independent from other
components.

To fix this we can use a dependency array as the second arg of `useEffect` to
indicate to react to only re-render when the objects in the dependency array
change.

> important to realize that react is using shallow comparison between the two
> objects in render: even if they have the same properties you will get a rerun
> of useEffect Great article on explaining this more in depth:
> [Equality](https://medium.com/coding-at-dawn/es6-object-is-vs-in-javascript-7ce873064719#:~:text=The%202%20differences%20between%20%3D%3D%3D,treats%20them%20as%20not%20equal.)

The third exercise is about generalizing our useEffect to make it into a common
component that can be reused.

In order to do this we can recognize that when we store into local storage we're
using a key value pair:

`function useLocalStorageState(key, defaultValue='')`

Generalize useState

`const [state, setState] = React.useState(() => window.localStorage.getItem(key) ?? initialValue)`

Lastly, we generalize our useEffect

`React.useEffect(() => window.localStorage.setItem(key, state), [key, state])`

## Background

`React.useEffect` is a built-in hook that allows you to run some custom code
after React renders (and re-renders) your component to the DOM. It accepts a
callback function which React will call after the DOM has been updated:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  // your side-effect code here.
  // this is where you can make HTTP requests or interact with browser APIs.
})
```

Feel free to take a look at `src/examples/hook-flow.png` if you're interested in
the timing of when your functions are run. This will make more sense after
finishing the exercises/extra credit/instruction.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/02.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.js)

In this exercise, we're going to enhance our `<Greeting />` component to get its
initial state value from localStorage (if available) and keep localStorage
updated as the `name` is updated.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ lazy state initialization

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-1.js)

Right now, every time our component function is run, our function reads from
localStorage. This is problematic because it could be a performance bottleneck
(reading from localStorage can be slow). And what's more we only actually need
to know the value from localStorage the first time this component is rendered!
So the additional reads are wasted effort.

To avoid this problem, React's useState hook allows you to pass a function
instead of the actual value, and then it will only call that function to get the
state value when the component is rendered the first time. So you can go from
this: `React.useState(someExpensiveComputation())` To this:
`React.useState(() => someExpensiveComputation())`

And the `someExpensiveComputation` function will only be called when it's
needed!

Make the `React.useState` call use lazy initialization to avoid a performance
bottleneck of reading into localStorage on every render.

> Learn more about
> [lazy state initialization](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/use-state-lazy-initialization-and-function-updates)

### 2. ðŸ’¯ effect dependencies

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-2.js)

The callback we're passing to `React.useEffect` is called after _every_ render
of our component (including re-renders). This is exactly what we want because we
want to make sure that the `name` is saved into localStorage whenever it
changes, but there are various reasons a component can be re-rendered (for
example, when a parent component in the application tree gets re-rendered).

Really, we _only_ want localStorage to get updated when the `name` state
actually changes. It doesn't need to re-run any other time. Luckily for us,
`React.useEffect` allows you to pass a second argument called the "dependency
array" which signals to React that your effect callback function should be
called when (and only when) those dependencies change. So we can use this to
avoid doing unnecessary work!

Add a dependencies array for `React.useEffect` to avoid the callback being
called too frequently.

### 3. ðŸ’¯ custom hook

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-3.js)

The best part of hooks is that if you find a bit of logic inside your component
function that you think would be useful elsewhere, you can put that in another
function and call it from the components that need it (just like regular
JavaScript). These functions you create are called "custom hooks".

Create a custom hook called `useLocalStorageState` for reusability of all this
logic.

### 4. ðŸ’¯ flexible localStorage hook

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-4.js)

Take your custom `useLocalStorageState` hook and make it generic enough to
support any data type (remember, you have to serialize objects to strings... use
`JSON.stringify` and `JSON.parse`). Go wild with this!

## Notes

If you'd like to learn more about when different hooks are called and the order
in which they're called, then open up `src/examples/hook-flow.png` and
`src/examples/hook-flow.js`. Play around with that a bit and hopefully that will
help solidify this for you. Note that understanding this isn't absolutely
necessary for you to understand hooks, but it _will_ help you in some situations
so it's useful to understand.

> PLEASE NOTE: there was a subtle change in the order of cleanup functions
> getting called in React 17:
> https://github.com/kentcdodds/react-hooks/issues/90

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=02%3A%20useEffect%3A%20persistent%20state&em=kevin.d.kim1116%40gmail.com).
